Ref Guide - OpenSCAP Overview (#80)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: modules/administration/pages/openscap.adoc

[[ch-openscap]]
= System Security via OpenSCAP

The Security Certification and Authorization Package (SCAP) is a standardized compliance checking solution for enterprise-level Linux infrastructures.
It is a line of specifications maintained by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) for maintaining system security for enterprise systems.

{productname} uses OpenSCAP to implement the SCAP specifications.
OpenSCAP is an auditing tool that utilizes the Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format (XCCDF). XCCDF is a standard way of expressing checklist content and defines security checklists.
It also combines with other specifications such as Common Platform Enumeration (CPE), Common Configuration Enumeration (CCE), and Open Vulnerability and Assessment Language (OVAL), to create a SCAP-expressed checklist that can be processed by SCAP-validated products.

[[s1-openscap-features]]
== OpenSCAP Features

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

OpenSCAP verifies the presence of patches by using content produced by the SUSE Security Team (https://www.suse.com/support/security/), checks system security configuration settings and examines systems for signs of compromise by using rules based on standards and specifications.

To effectively use OpenSCAP, the following must be available:

A tool to verify a system confirms to a standard::
{productname} uses OpenSCAP as an auditing feature.
It allows you to schedule and view compliance scans for any system.

SCAP content::
SCAP content files defining the test rules can be created from scratch if you understand at least XCCDF or OVAL.
XCCDF content is also frequently published online under open source licenses and this content can be customized to suit your needs.
+

> The [systemitem]``openscap-content``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> package provides default content guidance for systems via a template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [systemitem]``openscap-content`` package provides default content guidance for systems via a template.
```

[NOTE]
====

> {suse}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> supports the use of templates to evaluate your systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{suse} supports the use of templates to evaluate your systems.
```

However, you are creating custom content at your own risk.
====
ifdef::showremarks[]
#
 ke 2013-08-28: Do we have SCAP content providers? Such as: The United States Government
   Configuration Baseline (USGCB) for RHEL5 Desktop or Community-provided content (openscap-content
   package)? For more info, see
   https://access.redhat.com/site/documentation/en-US/Red_Hat_Network_Satellite/5.5/html/User_Guide/chap-Red_Hat_Network_Satellite-User_Guide-OpenSCAP.html #
endif::showremarks[]

SCAP was created to provide a standardized approach to maintaining system security, and the standards that are used will therefore continually change to meet the needs of the community and enterprise businesses.

> New specifications are governed by NIST's SCAP Release cycle in order to provide a consistent and repeatable revision work flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New specifications are governed by NIST's SCAP Release cycle to provide a consistent and repeatable revision work flow.
```

For more information, see http://scap.nist.gov/timeline.html.

[[s1-openscap-suma-prerq]]
== Prerequisites for Using OpenSCAP in {productname}

The following sections describe the server and client prerequisites for using OpenSCAP.

Package Requirements::

> As Server: {productname}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Server: {productname} 1.7 or later.
```

> 1.7 or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+
For the Client: [systemitem]``spacewalk-oscap`` package (available from the {productname} Tools Child Channel).

Other Requirements::
Client: Distribution of the XCCDF content to all client machines.

.OpenSCAP Auditing Availability
[NOTE]
====
OpenSCAP auditing is not available on Salt SSH clients.
====

You can distribute XCCDF content to client machines using any of the following methods:

* Traditional Methods (CD, USB, NFS, scp, ftp)
* {productname} Scripts
* RPMs

Custom RPMs are the recommended way to distribute SCAP content to other machines.
RPM packages can be signed and verified to ensure their integrity.
Installation, removal, and verification of RPM packages can be managed from the user interface.

[[s2-openscap-suma-audit-scans]]
== Performing Audit Scans

OpenSCAP integration in {productname} provides the ability to perform audit scans on client systems.
This section describes the available scanning methods.

.OpenSCAP Scans via Salt ssh-push Clients
[IMPORTANT]
====

> Currently performing an OpenSCAP scan is disabled in the WebUI for Salt ssh-push clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently performing an OpenSCAP scan is disabled in the {webui} for Salt ssh-push clients.
```

This functionality will be adapted and enabled in a future release.
====

[[pro-os-suma-audit-scans-webui]]
.Procedure: Scans via the Web Interface

> . To perform a scan via the Web interface, log in to {productname} .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To perform a scan via the Web interface, log in to {productname}.
```

. Click on menu:Systems[] and select the target system.

> . Click on menu:Audit[Schedule] .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click on menu:Audit[Schedule].
```

> . Fill in the Schedule New XCCDF Scan form. For more information about the fields on this page, see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Fill in the Schedule New XCCDF Scan form. For more information about the fields on this page, see xref:reference:audit/system-details-audit.adoc#sm-audit-schedule[].

```

> xref:reference:audit/system-details-audit.adoc#sm-audit-schedule[Schedule Audit]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+
WARNING: The XCCDF content is validated before it is run on the remote system.
Specifying invalid arguments can make spacewalk-oscap fail to validate or run.
Due to security concerns the [command]``oscap xccdf eval`` command only accepts a limited set of parameters.
+

+
Run the [command]``mgr_check`` command to ensure the action is being picked up by the client system.
+

----
mgr_check -vv
----
+
NOTE: If the {productname} daemon ([command]``rhnsd``) or [command]``osad`` are running on the client system, the action will be picked up by these services.
On systemd-based systems, you can check if they are running with this command:

----
service rhnsd start
----

or

----
service osad start
----
+

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// FIXME: this xref will only work if the target is in the same file (or module?).
```

----
+
Where:
** `1000010001` is the system ID (sid).
** [path]``/usr/local/share/scap/usgcb-sled11desktop-xccdf.xml`` is the path to the content location on the client system. In this case, it assumes USGCB content in the [path]``/usr/local/share/scap`` directory.
** [option]``--profile united_states_government_configuration_baseline`` is an additional argument for the [command]``oscap`` command. In this case, it is using the USGCB.
. Run the script on the command-line interface of any system. The system needs the appropriate Python and XML-RPC libraries installed.
. Run the [command]``mgr_check`` command to ensure that the action is being picked up by the client system.
+

----
mgr_check -vv
----
+
If the {productname} daemon ([command]``rhnsd``) or [command]``osad`` are running on the client system, the action will be picked up by these services.
To check if they are running, use:
+

----
service rhnsd start
----
+
or
+

----
service osad start
----

.Enabling Upload of Detailed SCAP Files
[NOTE]
====
To make sure detailed information about the scan will be available, activate the upload of detailed SCAP files on the clients to be evaluated.

> On the menu:Admin[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to menu:Admin[Organization] and select an organization.
```

>  page, click on menu:Organization[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ```

>  and select one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Click on the menu:Configuration[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the menu:Configuration[] tab, check [guimenu]``Enable Upload Of Detailed SCAP Files``.
```

>  tab and check menu:Enable Upload Of Detailed SCAP Files[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This feature generates an additional HTML version when you run a scan.

> The results will show an extra line like: ``Detailed Results: xccdf-report.html xccdf-results.xml

Reviewer: Probably also not ok...
```suggestion
The results will show an extra line like:
+
----
Detailed Results: xccdf-report.html xccdf-results.xml scap-yast2sec-oval.xml.result.xml
----
```

>      scap-yast2sec-oval.xml.result.xml``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ```

====

[[s2-openscap-suma-audit-scans_view]]
== Viewing SCAP Results

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

There are three methods of viewing the results of finished scans:

> * Via the Web interface. Once the scan has finished, the results should show up on the menu:Audit[] tab of a specific system. This page is discussed in <<s2-openscap-suma-pages>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Via the Web interface.
When the scan has finished, results show up on the menu:Audit[] tab of a specific system.
This page is discussed in <<s2-openscap-suma-pages>>.
// ^ FIXME: xref
```

* Via the API functions in handler ``system.scap``.
* Via the [command]``spacewalk-report`` command as follows:
+

----
spacewalk-report system-history-scap
spacewalk-report scap-scan
spacewalk-report scap-scan-results
----

[[s2-openscap-suma-pages]]
== OpenSCAP {productname} Web Interface

The following sections describe the tabs in the {productname} {webui} that provide access to OpenSCAP and its features.

=== OpenSCAP Scans Page

> Click the menu:Audit[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to menu:Audit[OpenSCAP].
```

>  tab on the top navigation bar, then OpenSCAP on the left.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
